README.md, before:

PostgreSQL migration management tool.

I like to lean heavily on the database.  That means I don't like to use tools that get in the way of that, stopping me from doing what I want.  That being said, working with the database could benefit from better tooling.

There are plenty of other migration solutions out there, but this one's mine.  The main alternative I've considered is sqitch, and while it seems to work pretty well, I've recently been looking at how to handle multiple tenants in a PostgreSQL database with a schema-per-tenant setup.  That means that I want to run the migrations per schema.  Unfortunately, sometimes I find that I need to mention specific names of the schemas or users, and when using psql's variables to substitute those in with sqitch, I hit unexpected limitations.

Here are some of my design goals with spawn:

- [x] Handle history of functions/stored procs, so we can see proper history.
- [x] Ability to write custom hand-crafted migrations.
- [x] Plain SQL mostly, or rather generates plain SQL that can be modified.
- [x] Create empty migrations.
- [ ] Allow migrations bundled in another package, like a framework.  See [Multiple package migrations design](#multiple-package-migrations-design) below.
- [ ] Idempotently apply migrations to database.
  - [ ] Allow for 'adopting' a migration, where you record in the database that it's been applied, without doing anything.  Useful for if you're bringing in existing migrations from another system that have already been applied to the database.
  - [ ] List migrations in database
  - [ ] Ability to apply specific migration or all
- [ ] Support for rollback scripts as an optional feature.
  - [ ] Key template functions so that you can begin a transaction, but at the end you can optionally commit or rollback, based on a migration apply flag.  This allows running 'apply' to test that there's no errors, but rollback afterwards in test mode.
  - [ ] Predefined way of expressing a section in a migration for rollback.  Gets called under specific conditions.
- [ ] Migration status checking, to see what's been applied to a database.
- [ ] Easy to spin up new tenant schema.
- [ ] Easy to migrate each tenant schema.
- [ ] If you have a view or function that depends on components that have changed, it would be nice to have a way to alert that the view or function should be recreated because it will now be different.
- [ ] Supporting migrations from multiple folders.  E.g., if a separate project provided some of your migrations, then you can apply migrations from both folders.
- [ ] Find a good way for testing SQL/unit testing.  Maybe something like what pgtap has.  Maybe two types of tests: ones that run after a migration, based on the state of the db at that time, and ones that run after all migrations, that check for regressions.  Although, the latter seem more/most useful.  Not sure there's any need for testing old changes that are potentially replaced.  Perhaps valuable in cases where you apply to multiple databases (e.g., drupal is installed across many machines), so you want to ensure that each step of a migration works given the unique state of that database.  So perhaps value for both types of tests.
- [ ] Report on which components have changes that have never been included in a migration.  Basically, check for the hash of that component and see if it's in any lock files, and if the migration includes that file in its SQL.
- [ ] Store full schema changes applied in a migration table in database, so we have a record of what was done.
- [ ] Variables supported, for substitution, as well as matrices to generate migrations for a bunch of sites.
- [ ] Store variables used for execution within the database migration table.
  - [ ] Allow encryption of variables in case they contain sensitive data.
- [ ] Allow a migration to have some parts that apply to shared schema, and some that apply to tenant schemas (e.g., via matrix).  But even more complicated, allow us to reapply that change again, with different tenants, and it will only apply the tenant related changes to the new tenants, and not the shared schema changes.
- [ ] Keep track of which migrations have been applied, so that when targeting a schema it will check which need to be applied and then apply all.
- [ ] Handle secrets
- [ ] Ability to preview in neovim and/or vscode the outputted sql, as you make changes to the migration template.
- [ ] Watch a particular function or view, and re-apply automatically upon file change, to help with local testing.
  - [ ] Support a jinja template watch for local dev against local database, where if the rendered jinja template changes it gets re-applied.  Useful in cases where we're updating views that depend on each other, and want to automatically recreate all those views as we edit files.
- [ ] Stretch goals:
  - [ ] Allow reading data from file types like csv's and use in templates, so you can loop over csv data to create insert(s), updates, whatever.
  - [ ] Some clever way to watch changes in the view/function folder, and automatically update.  Functions are easier, but views will fail when columns change or they have dependencies.
    - [ ] I've tried having a schema dedicated to these things that are easy to throw away and rectrate, but the two problems are (a) it can get slow when there's more, making it hard to do in transactoin, and (b) I suspect we'll hit cases where can't be fully done inside transaction or rolled back.
  - [ ] Handle migration of views properly (e.g., when they depend on each other).
  - [ ] Reverting.  For now, likely this will assume you're performing DDL in a transaction in most cases.  Later, want to support something more official, particularly for cases where transactions are not possible or feasible.
  - [ ] Flatten schema.  E.g., deploy to local db with unique random values for variables (e.g., schema and user names), export again, and replace all references to the unique schema name with template variables again.
  - [ ] Examine view dependencies, so that when these are updated we can check if the child views need to be deleted and recreated.
  - [ ] SQL validation, perhaps similar to sqlx in Rust.
  - [ ] Custom plugins or extensions.
  - [ ] Inspect postgresql to learn dependencies of views, to make it easy to drop and recreate exactly the ones needed when creating a new migration.
  - [ ] Syntax highlighting/themes like bat (may be excessive, particularly since bat and other tools can be used -- e.g., `spawn migration build 20240907212659-initial | bat -l sql`)
  - [ ] Pin variables inside database (optionally encrypted?) in addition to SQL components, for audit/replay reasons.

# Design

We have three primary folders:

1. `<base spawn folder>/components`.  This contains standalone SQL snippets that can be modified and reused.  These are minijinja templates, but they could be plain SQL.  The goal is to have proper change tracking for these, so that we can look at the history in git for that file and see how it has changed over time.
  - A subfolder may be `<base spawn folder>/idempotent_schemas`, containing schemas that are safe to destroy and reapply.  They operate the same as components for now, but one day we may add special functionality around them.
2. `<base spawn folder>/migrations`.  This folder contains subfolders, one for each migration, and those folders contain the migration script.  E.g., `20240802030220-support-roles/up.sql.jinja`.  These are minijinja templates, designed to produce plain SQL migration scripts.  In these templates, you can import components.
   - Containes a `pinned` file, which is a list of file names to their sha256 pinned file (see 3. below).
3. `<base spawn folder>/objects`.  This folder contains a copy of files as they were at a particular time that the migration was made stored by hash.  This allows the migration to be rerun/recreated even if the referenced file has changed.  Check [Pinnig](#pinning) below for more details.

Design goals:

- When updating functions or (some) views, you edit the file in the components folder for it in place, and reference that component in your new migration script.  This ensures that git diffs will show what's changed in the function, rather than being a fresh copy.
- A record of the components used in a migration script are kept as they were at that time.  This helps in case there is a need to return to an earlier migration script and update it for whatever reason.  The version of the component at that time can be used, instead of the current version.
- Support for variables, so that things such as schema names can be configurable (e.g., generating migrations for multiple tenancies in a schema-per-tenant setup).
- Support plain PostgreSQL SQL, so that we aren't locked out of any database features.
- Track migrations that have been applied to database in a table.

# Commands

Proposal of commands:

- `spawn init`
- `spawn migration new <name in kebab case>` creates a new migration with the provided name, picking an appropriate datetime.
- `spawn migration pin <migration>` pins the migration with the current components.
- `spawn migration build <migration> --pinned=<true|false>` builds the migration into the needed SQL.  `--pinned is required`.

## Create a new migration

Last parameter is the name of the migration:

```
spawn migration new "is-the-best"
```

Creates a migration folder with a timestamp followed by the name, along with a ready to go `script.sql` file for the migration.

## Apply migration to database

```
spawn migration apply 20240907212659-initial
```

# Thoughts

Think about this: can I version stored procedures in a clever way that involves automatically creating and referencing new version of stored procedures, but only when updated.  E.g., add_func_v1 calls other_func_v1.  We update add_func and now have add_func_v2, but other_func_v1 hasn't changed so add_func_v2 points to old.  Advantage: when we do an update, we're only updating a small number of stored procs.  Downside: very complex to work with without tooling.

Alternatively, put everything in app code by default, and send the whole procedure over as an anonymous function each call.

Another:
- For example, have your application setup a schema to contain its version-specific database components. The schema will contain an immutable application version, such as its commit hash, in its name. This allows a given version of the application to only use its own set of sprocs and views. On deploy, run the SQL scripts to create the sprocs and views for that version.

Have been recommended to  avoiding having views depend on other views.  And particularly, not having views depend on materialised views.

# Testing

```
docker exec -ti spawn-db psql -U spawn
```

# Examples

Printing out SQL:

```bash
cargo run migration build 20240907212659-initial static/example.json
```

# Next

- Clean up how the components loader data is passed in?  Feels messy providing it two separate paths, not sure if it should be passed the whole config.

# Multiple package migrations design

Provide a standardised way for a package to expose its db migrations.  Then, when another package with a binary imports it, it ensures there is a way to run the binary so that it outputs the migrations in the standardised way.

The spawn tool can then be configured to call that binary too, and operate in all the usual ways for things that make sense (e.g., can't pin?).  So you can see which migrations are unapplied, and which have been applied, etc.

1. Framework has public function that returns embedded migrations
2. Project that imports the framework has a subcommand that outputs the migrations when invoked in an expected format, to the terminal.
3. Migrator can be told this command, and will allow you to run normal migration commands except treating the output from this binary as a pseudo file system rather than actual folder.

**Important**: Make sure this supports variables, and custom passing in of schema, etc.

TODO: think about how to handle ordering.  Scenario: someone uses another package with its own migrations, version 2.3.0.  It then does its own migrations for a while on its own schema, some of which interact with tables from the other package.  Later, they update the upstream package from 2.3.0 to 3.1.4, where a number of migrations need to be applied.  Those migrations should be considered to take place after any local migrations that have been done to date.  How do we handle this?  E.g., do we have a local file in repo that specifies what order to apply upstream package migrations?  Maybe when you run it, it can check existing migrations, and specify new ones to be done at that point.

# Pinning

In order to ensure that earlier migrations can be run with the same source components, we support pinning.  What this does is take a snapshot of the components folder as it is at that moment, and stores a reference to that snapshot in the migration folder.  From then on, the migration can be run using the pinned version.

Under the hood, this works in a similar way to git, storing copies of files in the `/pinned` subfolder, with filenames matching their hash.  The list of files and their hashes are stored as tree objects in the same `/pinned` folder, and the migration's config points to the root tree for its snapshot.

It is intended that you commit the `/pinned` folder to your repository.

To pin:

```bash
spawn migration pin <migration name>
```

# Testing

For now, we will support only postgres for testing.  Testing will require psql to be available.

- Allow configuration of how to invoke psql.
- Provide scaffolding for automatic use of create database <x> with template <y>.
  - Configurable whether failed or successful tests tear down the test database or not.
- Follow the postgres testing style of producing an expected output, and then comparing future runs to that expected output with a diff.

Commit message:

testing running test against database

README.md, after:

PostgreSQL migration management tool.

I like to lean heavily on the database.  That means I don't like to use tools that get in the way of that, stopping me from doing what I want.  That being said, working with the database could benefit from better tooling.

There are plenty of other migration solutions out there, but this one's mine.  The main alternative I've considered is sqitch, and while it seems to work pretty well, I've recently been looking at how to handle multiple tenants in a PostgreSQL database with a schema-per-tenant setup.  That means that I want to run the migrations per schema.  Unfortunately, sometimes I find that I need to mention specific names of the schemas or users, and when using psql's variables to substitute those in with sqitch, I hit unexpected limitations.

Here are some of my design goals with spawn:

- [x] Handle history of functions/stored procs, so we can see proper history.
- [x] Ability to write custom hand-crafted migrations.
- [x] Plain SQL mostly, or rather generates plain SQL that can be modified.
- [x] Create empty migrations.
- [ ] Allow migrations bundled in another package, like a framework.  See [Multiple package migrations design](#multiple-package-migrations-design) below.
- [ ] Idempotently apply migrations to database.
  - [ ] Allow for 'adopting' a migration, where you record in the database that it's been applied, without doing anything.  Useful for if you're bringing in existing migrations from another system that have already been applied to the database.
  - [ ] List migrations in database
  - [ ] Ability to apply specific migration or all
- [ ] Support for rollback scripts as an optional feature.
  - [ ] Key template functions so that you can begin a transaction, but at the end you can optionally commit or rollback, based on a migration apply flag.  This allows running 'apply' to test that there's no errors, but rollback afterwards in test mode.
  - [ ] Predefined way of expressing a section in a migration for rollback.  Gets called under specific conditions.
- [ ] Migration status checking, to see what's been applied to a database.
- [ ] Easy to spin up new tenant schema.
- [ ] Easy to migrate each tenant schema.
- [ ] If you have a view or function that depends on components that have changed, it would be nice to have a way to alert that the view or function should be recreated because it will now be different.
- [ ] Supporting migrations from multiple folders.  E.g., if a separate project provided some of your migrations, then you can apply migrations from both folders.
- [ ] Find a good way for testing SQL/unit testing.  Maybe something like what pgtap has.  Maybe two types of tests: ones that run after a migration, based on the state of the db at that time, and ones that run after all migrations, that check for regressions.  Although, the latter seem more/most useful.  Not sure there's any need for testing old changes that are potentially replaced.  Perhaps valuable in cases where you apply to multiple databases (e.g., drupal is installed across many machines), so you want to ensure that each step of a migration works given the unique state of that database.  So perhaps value for both types of tests.
  - [ ] If useful, create helper functions like pgtap has, and optionally apply them to the database at test time, or to the copy that is used for tests.
- [ ] Report on which components have changes that have never been included in a migration.  Basically, check for the hash of that component and see if it's in any lock files, and if the migration includes that file in its SQL.
- [ ] Store full schema changes applied in a migration table in database, so we have a record of what was done.
- [ ] Variables supported, for substitution, as well as matrices to generate migrations for a bunch of sites.
- [ ] Store variables used for execution within the database migration table.
  - [ ] Allow encryption of variables in case they contain sensitive data.
- [ ] Allow a migration to have some parts that apply to shared schema, and some that apply to tenant schemas (e.g., via matrix).  But even more complicated, allow us to reapply that change again, with different tenants, and it will only apply the tenant related changes to the new tenants, and not the shared schema changes.
- [ ] Keep track of which migrations have been applied, so that when targeting a schema it will check which need to be applied and then apply all.
- [ ] Handle secrets
- [ ] Ability to preview in neovim and/or vscode the outputted sql, as you make changes to the migration template.
- [ ] Watch a particular function or view, and re-apply automatically upon file change, to help with local testing.
  - [ ] Support a jinja template watch for local dev against local database, where if the rendered jinja template changes it gets re-applied.  Useful in cases where we're updating views that depend on each other, and want to automatically recreate all those views as we edit files.
- [ ] Stretch goals:
  - [ ] Allow reading data from file types like csv's and use in templates, so you can loop over csv data to create insert(s), updates, whatever.
  - [ ] Some clever way to watch changes in the view/function folder, and automatically update.  Functions are easier, but views will fail when columns change or they have dependencies.
    - [ ] I've tried having a schema dedicated to these things that are easy to throw away and rectrate, but the two problems are (a) it can get slow when there's more, making it hard to do in transactoin, and (b) I suspect we'll hit cases where can't be fully done inside transaction or rolled back.
  - [ ] Handle migration of views properly (e.g., when they depend on each other).
  - [ ] Reverting.  For now, likely this will assume you're performing DDL in a transaction in most cases.  Later, want to support something more official, particularly for cases where transactions are not possible or feasible.
  - [ ] Flatten schema.  E.g., deploy to local db with unique random values for variables (e.g., schema and user names), export again, and replace all references to the unique schema name with template variables again.
  - [ ] Examine view dependencies, so that when these are updated we can check if the child views need to be deleted and recreated.
  - [ ] SQL validation, perhaps similar to sqlx in Rust.
  - [ ] Custom plugins or extensions.
  - [ ] Inspect postgresql to learn dependencies of views, to make it easy to drop and recreate exactly the ones needed when creating a new migration.
  - [ ] Syntax highlighting/themes like bat (may be excessive, particularly since bat and other tools can be used -- e.g., `spawn migration build 20240907212659-initial | bat -l sql`)
  - [ ] Pin variables inside database (optionally encrypted?) in addition to SQL components, for audit/replay reasons.

# Design

We have three primary folders:

1. `<base spawn folder>/components`.  This contains standalone SQL snippets that can be modified and reused.  These are minijinja templates, but they could be plain SQL.  The goal is to have proper change tracking for these, so that we can look at the history in git for that file and see how it has changed over time.
  - A subfolder may be `<base spawn folder>/idempotent_schemas`, containing schemas that are safe to destroy and reapply.  They operate the same as components for now, but one day we may add special functionality around them.
2. `<base spawn folder>/migrations`.  This folder contains subfolders, one for each migration, and those folders contain the migration script.  E.g., `20240802030220-support-roles/up.sql.jinja`.  These are minijinja templates, designed to produce plain SQL migration scripts.  In these templates, you can import components.
   - Containes a `pinned` file, which is a list of file names to their sha256 pinned file (see 3. below).
3. `<base spawn folder>/objects`.  This folder contains a copy of files as they were at a particular time that the migration was made stored by hash.  This allows the migration to be rerun/recreated even if the referenced file has changed.  Check [Pinnig](#pinning) below for more details.

Design goals:

- When updating functions or (some) views, you edit the file in the components folder for it in place, and reference that component in your new migration script.  This ensures that git diffs will show what's changed in the function, rather than being a fresh copy.
- A record of the components used in a migration script are kept as they were at that time.  This helps in case there is a need to return to an earlier migration script and update it for whatever reason.  The version of the component at that time can be used, instead of the current version.
- Support for variables, so that things such as schema names can be configurable (e.g., generating migrations for multiple tenancies in a schema-per-tenant setup).
- Support plain PostgreSQL SQL, so that we aren't locked out of any database features.
- Track migrations that have been applied to database in a table.

# Commands

Proposal of commands:

- `spawn init`
- `spawn migration new <name in kebab case>` creates a new migration with the provided name, picking an appropriate datetime.
- `spawn migration pin <migration>` pins the migration with the current components.
- `spawn migration build <migration> --pinned=<true|false>` builds the migration into the needed SQL.  `--pinned is required`.

## Create a new migration

Last parameter is the name of the migration:

```
spawn migration new "is-the-best"
```

Creates a migration folder with a timestamp followed by the name, along with a ready to go `script.sql` file for the migration.

## Apply migration to database

```
spawn migration apply 20240907212659-initial
```

# Thoughts

Think about this: can I version stored procedures in a clever way that involves automatically creating and referencing new version of stored procedures, but only when updated.  E.g., add_func_v1 calls other_func_v1.  We update add_func and now have add_func_v2, but other_func_v1 hasn't changed so add_func_v2 points to old.  Advantage: when we do an update, we're only updating a small number of stored procs.  Downside: very complex to work with without tooling.

Alternatively, put everything in app code by default, and send the whole procedure over as an anonymous function each call.

Another:
- For example, have your application setup a schema to contain its version-specific database components. The schema will contain an immutable application version, such as its commit hash, in its name. This allows a given version of the application to only use its own set of sprocs and views. On deploy, run the SQL scripts to create the sprocs and views for that version.

Have been recommended to  avoiding having views depend on other views.  And particularly, not having views depend on materialised views.

# Testing

```
docker exec -ti spawn-db psql -U spawn
```

# Examples

Printing out SQL:

```bash
cargo run migration build 20240907212659-initial static/example.json
```

# Next

- Clean up how the components loader data is passed in?  Feels messy providing it two separate paths, not sure if it should be passed the whole config.

# Multiple package migrations design

Provide a standardised way for a package to expose its db migrations.  Then, when another package with a binary imports it, it ensures there is a way to run the binary so that it outputs the migrations in the standardised way.

The spawn tool can then be configured to call that binary too, and operate in all the usual ways for things that make sense (e.g., can't pin?).  So you can see which migrations are unapplied, and which have been applied, etc.

1. Framework has public function that returns embedded migrations
2. Project that imports the framework has a subcommand that outputs the migrations when invoked in an expected format, to the terminal.
3. Migrator can be told this command, and will allow you to run normal migration commands except treating the output from this binary as a pseudo file system rather than actual folder.

**Important**: Make sure this supports variables, and custom passing in of schema, etc.

TODO: think about how to handle ordering.  Scenario: someone uses another package with its own migrations, version 2.3.0.  It then does its own migrations for a while on its own schema, some of which interact with tables from the other package.  Later, they update the upstream package from 2.3.0 to 3.1.4, where a number of migrations need to be applied.  Those migrations should be considered to take place after any local migrations that have been done to date.  How do we handle this?  E.g., do we have a local file in repo that specifies what order to apply upstream package migrations?  Maybe when you run it, it can check existing migrations, and specify new ones to be done at that point.

# Pinning

In order to ensure that earlier migrations can be run with the same source components, we support pinning.  What this does is take a snapshot of the components folder as it is at that moment, and stores a reference to that snapshot in the migration folder.  From then on, the migration can be run using the pinned version.

Under the hood, this works in a similar way to git, storing copies of files in the `/pinned` subfolder, with filenames matching their hash.  The list of files and their hashes are stored as tree objects in the same `/pinned` folder, and the migration's config points to the root tree for its snapshot.

It is intended that you commit the `/pinned` folder to your repository.

To pin:

```bash
spawn migration pin <migration name>
```

# Testing

For now, we will support only postgres for testing.  Testing will require psql to be available.

- Allow configuration of how to invoke psql.
- Provide scaffolding for automatic use of create database <x> with template <y>.
  - Configurable whether failed or successful tests tear down the test database or not.
- Follow the postgres testing style of producing an expected output, and then comparing future runs to that expected output with a diff.
